

===== PAGE 1 =====
Research paper
Deep reinforcement learning enabling a BCFbot to learn various 
undulatory patterns
Imran Hameed
a , b
, Xu Chao
a , b
, David Navarro-Alarcon
a
, Xingjian Jing
b , *
a
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, China
b
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China
ARTICLE INFO
Index Terms:
Biomimetic marine robots
Swimming gait optimization
Deep reinforcement learning
ABSTRACT
In bio-inspired marine robots, one particular motion pattern is generally adopted to achieve benefits of that 
pattern. However, multiple gait patterns can be utilized together in a single biomimetic design to employ their 
benefits, as required. However, there is a lack of a unified control scheme that can be used to optimize and mimic 
undulatory patterns observed among different organisms in the body and/or caudal fin (BCF) category. Thus, 
central pattern generators (CPGs) were incorporated into a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) architecture to 
train a robot to develop various swimming gaits. The proposed framework can not only develop and optimize 
distinct motion patterns but also seamlessly and instantly switch between them. Oscillators integrated into a 
learning paradigm provide a bioinspired framework to systematically develop a variety of swimming gaits. The 
prototyped BCFbot has multiple joints, which makes it easy to realize more than one tail undulation patterns. 
Three different swimming patterns (anguilliform, sub-carangiform, and carangiform) were learned through 
simulation and then verified on a physical robot. Testing and comparison results show that the claimed benefits 
of the three benchmark motion patterns can be well realized using the developed robot and can be freely 
switched and optimized using the developed DRL mechanism. This should be the first attempt for achieving a 
multimotion pattern optimization and switching within a single BCFbot and demonstrating a successful motion 
generation regime similar to a real animal.
1. Introduction
Marine robots can be broadly divided into two categories: propeller- 
based robots relying on screw-type thrusters ( Singh et al., 2017/06 ) or 
fan-wing propellers ( Gao et al., 2021/12 ), and bioinspired designs 
mimicking marine creatures ( Raj and Thakur, 2016/04 ; Wang et al., 
2022 ). Bioinspired marine robots have undulating and/or oscillating 
surfaces inspired by marine creatures. They use tentacles ( Fras et al., 
2018 ), caudal ( Katzschmann et al., 2018/03 ), or pectoral ( Meng et al., 
2022 ) fins to produce propulsion. Compared to propeller-based robots, 
bio-inspired designs cause less vibrations and noise in marine environ -
ment and provide better maneuverability ( Katzschmann et al., 
2018/03 ). Due to absence of fast-moving parts, they are considered safe 
for the marine life. They can be made using soft materials to withstand 
high pressure ( Li et al., 2021/03 ). They can be propelled and maneu -
vered using a single propulsor ( Kopman and Porfiri, 2013 ).
1.1. BCF locomotion in nature
Marine biologists have classified the propulsion phenomena in ma -
rine creatures into two broad and distinctive categories: body and 
caudal fin (BCF) propulsion, and median and paired fin (MPF) propul -
sion ( Lindsey, 1978 ). BCF swimmers exhibit different swimming modes, 
depending on their body shape, size, and flexibility. Although the 
swimming gaits of BCF swimmers appear visibly different, they are 
difficult to differentiate quantitatively. A recent study ( Di Santo et al., 
2021 ) ( Fig. 1 ) showed that the amplitudes of the constituent members 
are either the same or slightly different, and that the wavelength is a 
critical factor that can be used to differentiate them.
In Fig. 1 , the left-hand side shows the anguilliform mode, in which 
the average wavelength is the lowest. An example is Anguilla rostrata 
(American eel). Swimmers with long and slender bodies, such as snakes 
and eels, exhibit this motion pattern. The other categories have fusiform- 
shaped bodies. Depending on the flexibility of their bodies, they exhibit 
sub-carangiform to carangiform motion patterns. For example, 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: xingjing@cityu.edu.hk , xingjian.jing@gmail.com (X. Jing). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ocean Engineering
journal homep age: www. elsevier.com /locate/oceane ng
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2025.120322
Received 7 March 2024; Received in revised form 7 December 2024; Accepted 5 January 2025  
Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
Available online 11 January 2025 
0029-8018/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 


===== PAGE 2 =====
Salvalinus fontinalis (trout) exhibits a sub-carangiform pattern, and 
Scomber scombrus (mackerel) exhibits a carangiform pattern. The trend 
for wavelength increases from the anguilliform to sub-carangiform and 
carangiform swimmers.
There are certain benefits associated with all types of swimming 
gaits. Anguilliform swimmers, for instance, are generally slow, but some 
can move backward freely (e.g., eel ( D ’ AoUT and and Aerts, 1999 )), 
whereas carangiform swimmers cannot. Carangiform swimmers move 
relatively faster, and their average linear speed for forward locomotion 
is relatively higher than that of anguilliform swimmers; for example, 
scombroids can swim at speeds higher than 1 m/s ( Lindsey, 1978 ).
1.2. BCF locomotion in robotics
On the bio-inspired side of marine robotics, certain motion patterns 
have been adopted for robotic platforms to exploit the benefits related to 
these patterns. For example, the platform in ( Niu et al., 2014 ) can move 
forward and backward using the anguilliform locomotion pattern, and 
the robotic fish in ( Clapham and Hu, 2014 ) can swim at high speeds 
using the carangiform mode.
Numerous efforts have been made to mimic the anguilliform ( Crespi 
and Ijspeert, 2008 ; Niu et al., 2013/09 ), sub-carangiform ( Salum ¨a et al., 
2013 ; Daou et al., 2011 ), and carangiform ( Clapham and Hu, 2014 ; 
Farideddin et al., 2015 ) gaits on BCF-type robots. However, most 
existing studies have focused on a particular motion pattern or feature 
related to one type of swimmer. In this study, we developed multiple 
motion patterns on the same platform to capture the benefits associated 
with different patterns.
Travelling-wave kinematics based on Lighthill ’ s work ( Lighthill, 
1960 ), also known as the fish body wave kinematics, have been exten -
sively studied and applied on fish-like robots. The parameters of the 
aforementioned model can be manually tuned to obtain different 
waveforms. For example, carangiform motion patterns have been stud -
ied on robotic fishes ( Farideddin et al., 2015 ; Barrett et al., 1996 ; Junzhi 
et al., 2004 ; Yan et al., 2008/06 ) using travelling-wave kinematics. 
Different patterns can also be established by capturing the kinematic 
motion parameters of live organisms and rendering the corresponding 
swimming patterns on their robotic counterparts. For example, data 
from live lampreys have been used to reproduce anguilliform swimming 
gait in a robotic lamprey ( Hultmark et al., 2007 ). Instead of manually 
tuning, using pre-defined kinematics, or focusing on a particular 
swimming pattern, we developed a unified scheme to learn such pat -
terns, whereby the same scheme can be optimized for various patterns 
exhibited by different organisms.
Central pattern generators (CPGs) have long been studied as circuits 
in spinal cords of vertebrates for rhythmogenesis, that is, they are 
responsible for rhythmic motion generation without requiring periodic 
input ( Ijspeert, 2008/05 ). They have been extensively used for robots 
inspired by nature ( Niu et al., 2014 ; Crespi and Ijspeert, 2008 ; Zheng 
et al., 2022 ; Zhang et al., 2022 ) for motion generation. They receive 
commands from the midbrain for gait modulation and transition 
( Ijspeert et al., 2007/03 ). Inspired by this two-level gait generation and 
modulation process in nature, a similar bio-inspired scheme was 
conceived to explore the prospect of developing different motion pat -
terns exhibited by different swimmers in the BCF category. CPGs are 
used for low-level gait generation. This requires an efficient high-level 
learning and optimization technique that can exploit and modulate 
CPGs to acquire diverse behaviors. Thus, we chose deep reinforcement 
learning (DRL).
DRL combines reward-based optimization using multi-layer percep -
tron models ( Mnih et al., 2015/02 ). Its potential for use in various 
biomimetic platforms has been demonstrated ( Zheng et al., 2022 ; Zhang 
et al., 2022 ; Yan et al., 2021 ). It has multiple variants; in this study, trust 
region policy optimization (TRPO) ( Schulman et al., 2015 ) was used. 
Using DRL as high-level controller allows a robot to modulate the 
low-level controller by training without any supervised setup. The 
proposed schematic offers a learning framework for developing not one 
but a range of gaits. Hence, it has wide applicability on different plat -
forms resembling the BCF anatomy.
1.3. Contributions of this paper
We coupled the DRL method to the backend of the CPGs ( Fig. 3 ). This 
helped the robot to learn and explore multiple swimming gaits during 
the simulation. These gaits were validated and compared using the 
hardware of body and caudal fin robot (BCFbot) ( Fig. 2 ). We designed 
the BCFbot maintaining the general anatomy of BCF swimmers, with a 
head, tail, and caudal fin at the posterior end. A generic design was 
opted such that it can exhibit multiple motion profiles to exploit their 
benefits. The contributions of this study are summarized as follows: 
Fig. 1. Canonical swimming patterns included in the BCF category. Visual 
representations are originally from ( Katzschmann et al., 2018/03 ) and ampli -
tude information is taken from ( Meng et al., 2022 ).
Fig. 2. Left : Snapshot of physical BCFbot while swimming in laboratory pool. 
Center and Right : CAD models of the robot in top view with a big head and a 
small head.
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
2 


===== PAGE 3 =====
1) A bio-inspired learning framework combining DRL and CPGs was 
proposed, from which a variety of swimming gaits resembling those 
of different natural BCF swimmers emerged.
2) Swimming gaits were visualized on a physical BCFbot. The multi- 
segment tail of the robot could imitate more than one gait in the 
same design making the visualization and differentiation of different 
gaits easier.
3) A thorough comparison was made between the swimming gaits 
which revealed certain benefits associated with each gait type 
making them appropriate for different scenarios and applications.
4) Features of the combined DRL-CPG approach were demonstrated, 
which are not possible using the DRL-only approach.
When a thrust target was given to the proposed DRL-CPG scheme, it 
generated a swimming gait pattern. The mechanism by which different 
gaits were developed involved setting several targets for the thrust 
generated by the robot. If attempted using a standard DRL method, it 
may simply attempt to increase the speed of actuation to deliver 
different thrust targets which may have some drawbacks. First, it can 
result in irregular motion due to a decrease in the resolution of data 
points. Second, different gaits will not develop because a higher thrust 
target will be achieved by increasing the actuation speed.
In the proposed scheme, motion generation and modulation are dealt 
with separately; tail-beat frequency can be fixed, and different swim -
ming gaits can be explored based on different thrust targets. Once the 
gaits have been developed, the frequency can be easily modified while 
maintaining any particular gait. This gives complete control of the speed 
of the robot and allows comparison between the gaits. Moreover, the 
robot can shift smoothly from one gait to another because of the smooth 
convergence properties of the oscillators in short transient period. This 
framework eliminates the requirement for domain randomization, 
which is generally required in DRL-only cases for the transfer of policies 
from simulation to real scenarios.
The pairing of DRL with other methods can expand its ability to 
develop intelligent policies for learning and performing high-level tasks. 
In this study, we explored its potential for gaits development for a ma -
rine robot. The idea draws inspiration from two-stage gait generation, 
adaptation, and modulation in nature ( Ijspeert et al., 2007/03 ). Setting 
up a framework by arranging the two components (DRL and CPG) in a 
hierarchical fashion and giving different set points allows the explora -
tion of different ways to achieve those targets, thereby resulting in 
multiple useful gaits for different scenarios. This study investigated the 
framework on a BCF-type robot to explore three motion patterns (i.e., 
anguilliform, sub-carangiform, and carangiform).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Session II presents some 
relevant literature results, based on which Session III introduces our 
proposed learning method and training and control strategy. Session VI 
describes our testing rig setting up. The detailed pattern training results 
are shown in Session V with comparative studies in Session VI. A 
conclusion remark is given in Session VII.
2. Previous relevant work
Early efforts provide a basic categorization ( Breder, 1926 ) based on 
which many later studies have been developed. A comprehensive insight 
( Lindsey, 1978 ) of aquatic locomotion modes present the BCF mode of 
locomotion as one of the main categories. Previously, head and tail 
amplitude have been considered as the main differentiating factors be -
tween the members of this category ( Sfakiotakis et al., 1999 ). A recent 
study ( Di Santo et al., 2021 ) suggests wavelength to be a better metric to 
classify the locomotion modes and that the BCF spectrum should better 
be considered as a continuum rather than distinctive classes.
Reproducing motion behaviors of organisms on robotic platforms 
allows researchers to study those organisms. It is difficult to conduct 
exhaustive studies on live animals. Robotic platforms provide repeat -
ability and ease of experimentation ( Gravish and Lauder, 2018 ). Practice 
started with big swimming machines ( Morgansen et al., 2002 ; Tri -
antafyllou and Triantafyllou, 1995 ; Saimek and Li, 2004 ). With minia -
turization in actuation and energy storage, small-sized mobile marine 
robots can now be developed ( Wang et al., 2022 ).
A review on mechanics of anguilliform gait, development of loco -
motion controllers and trajectory tracking of an eel-like robot can be 
referred to ( Ostrowski and Burdick, 1998 ) and ( McIsaac and Ostrowski, 
2003 ). Anguilliform motion pattern is optimized on a multi-joint snake 
like robot ( Crespi and Ijspeert, 2008 ) and on a robotic fish ( Niu et al., 
2013 ) for both forward and backward locomotion. The anguilliform 
pattern is difficult to mimic since it requires large number of DoF ( Raj 
and Thakur, 2016 ). Whereas sub-carangiform or carangiform patterns 
are relatively easy to mimic. Hence, in the sub-carangiform and car -
angiform category we find quite a few efforts. For example, 
sub-carangiform pattern is exhibited in ( Salum ¨a et al., 2013 ) ( Daou 
et al., 2011 ) with a single actuator and a complaint tail and in ( Wu et al., 
2014 ) with 4 actuators. The results in ( Clapham and Hu, 2014 ; Far -
ideddin et al., 2015 ; Low et al., 2010 ; EunJung and Youngil, 2004 ) are 
just a few examples of robots mimicking the carangiform pattern.
There are not many works that focus on achieving multiple motion 
patterns on a single platform. In ( Fujiwara and Yamaguchi, 2017 ), 
sub-carangiform and carangiform patterns are realized but by making 
changes in design (adjusting compliance). In ( Li et al., 2011 ), three 
patterns are realized by selecting corresponding kinematics from liter -
ature. Our focus is to realize different motion patterns on the same 
platform not through any change in design or rendering pre-determined 
kinematics but via learning different swimming gaits.
Biomimetic robots require periodic inputs and CPGs are widely used 
for this purpose ( Ijspeert, 2008 ). ( Niu et al., 2014 ; Crespi and Ijspeert, 
2008 ; Zhang et al., 2022 ; Wu et al., 2014 ) are a few examples of their 
usage for BCF type robots. Its parameters have also been optimized using 
techniques like particle swarm optimization ( Yu et al., 2016 ; Wang 
Fig. 3. Control Architecture overlayed on the sketch of the robot in the back -
ground. Empty circles in the DRL-net indicate neurons. Circles with sinusoids 
inside in the CPG-net indicate oscillators coupled by phase coupling indicated 
by small black arrows between them. α
i 
and F
d 
indicate the actual joint angle 
and the desired force.
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
3 


===== PAGE 4 =====
et al., 2019 ) to maximize speed.
DRL has garnered traction over the years for its state-of-the-art 
optimization potential using neural networks. It can accommodate 
both discrete ( Mnih et al., 2015 ) and continuous action spaces ( Gao 
et al., 2021 ). Ranging from simple differential drives to bipeds and 
quadrupeds, it has applications in both terrestrial and marine domain 
( Yao et al., 2023 ), for example, propeller operated boat ( Marchesini 
et al., 2021 ), and biomimetic fish-like robot ( Yan et al., 2021 ). DRL has 
also been used along with oscillators. Such scheme has been applied to a 
hopper ( Campanaro et al., 2021 ), a robotic salamander ( Cho et al., 
2019 ) for optimization of oscillators in simulation, and a soft robotic 
snake ( Liu et al., 2023 ) to optimize locomotion controllers. In ( Yan et al., 
2021 ), a baseline behavior obtained by oscillators, is optimized using 
DRL for a multi-joint robotic fish. In ( Yu et al., 2021 ), DRL is used on a 
robotic fish for target tracking using visual feedback. Similarly in ( Zheng 
et al., 2022 ), it is used for attitude holding of a biomimetic fish in un -
known flow fields. In ( MiladShafiee, 2024 ), quadrupeds are trained 
using by combining DRL and CPGs.
In this study, we also optimize oscillators in a learning framework. 
However, instead of obtaining and optimizing one single locomotion 
gait, we obtain multiple motion patterns. The resultant setup can 
essentially obtain a continuum of motion patterns like the BCF spectrum 
observed among marine organisms. The framework adds up the benefits 
of DRL and CPGs such as easy modulation of output signals, guaranteed 
limit cycle behavior and easy transfer of policies from simulation to 
hardware. It should be the first time to achieve optimization of motion 
patterns using DRL and CPGs in a single marine robot with experimental 
validation.
3. The proposed learning and training methods
This session is to present the new proposed learning method with 
detailed algorithms and control scheme.
3.1. Deep reinforcement learning
A DRL framework is established in which a simulated BCFbot is 
trained in an episodic format. The agent takes an action a ( t ) according to 
policy π i.e., a ( t ) ∼ π ( s ( t )) , shifts from state s ( t ) to s ( t + 1 ) and is 
rewarded r based on a preset reward definition. This transition takes 
place according to state transition dynamics D = p ( s ( t + 1 )| s ( t ) , a ( t )) . An 
episode completes when this transition happens for T timesteps. Col -
lective reward of an episode is called a Return. Q
π 
is the expected value 
of return upon taking action a ( t ) in state s ( t ) following the policy π as 
described above, 
Q
π
( s , a ) = E
s ( t + 1 ) , a ( t + 1 ) ...
[
∑
T
t = 0
γ
t
r ( s ( t ) , a ( t ))
]
(1) 
A
π
( s , a ) = Q
π
( s , a )   V
π
( s ) . (2) 
The parameter γ is a limiting factor for future rewards. V
π 
is the 
expected return and A
π 
is called the advantage function.
Trust region policy optimization (TRPO) ( Schulman et al., 2015 ) is 
adopted in which the policy π has a set of parameters θ and the following 
objective is maximized, 
maximize
θ
E
[
π
θ
( a | s )
π
θ
k
( a | s )
A
π
θ
k
( s ( t ) , a ( t ))
]
, (3) 
where π
θ
k 
is the policy which is being improved upon π
θ
. TRPO takes a 
guaranteed step (3) to improve the policy from the previous one by 
measuring the Kullback-Leibler divergence, D
KL
, between the old and 
the new policy, 
E
s , a ∼ π
θ
k
[
D
KL
 
π
θ
k
(•| s ) , π
θ
(•| s )
)]
≤ δ , (4) 
which states that the divergence must be kept under a fixed value δ . Both 
the objective and the constraint are non-linear. For the main objective 
(3), linear approximation is done and for the constraint (4) quadratic 
approximation is done using Taylor expansion. Denoting the objective in 
(3) by L
θ
k
, we can approximate (3) and (4) as, 
L
θ
k
( θ ) ≈ L
θ
k
( θ
k
) + g
T
( θ   θ
k
) (5a) 
D
KL
≈
1
2
( θ   θ
k
)
T
H ( θ   θ
k
) , (5b) 
g being the first derivative of L
θ
k 
and H being the second derivative of 
D
KL
, 
g = ∇
θ
L
θ
k
= E
s , a ∼ π
θ
k
[
∇
θ
log π
θ
( a | s ) A
π
θ
k
]
(6a) 
H = ∇
2
θ
D
KL
. (6b) 
Algorithm I . Pseudocode for Training 
Considering the above approximations, the original objective and the 
constraint can now be combined as, 
θ
k + 1
= argmax
θ
g
T
( θ   θ
k
) (7) 
s . t .
1
2
( θ   θ
k
)
T
H ( θ   θ
k
) ≤ δ 
which can be analytically solved as, 
θ
k + 1
= θ
k
+
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ̅
2 δ
g
T
H
  1
g
√
H
  1
g . (8) 
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
4 


===== PAGE 5 =====
3.2. Rhythmogenesis
Rhythmogenesis is handled using CPGs. CPGs are implemented as a 
network of coupled oscillators. The green block in Fig. 3 represents the 
CPG network in which the red circles represent oscillators for individual 
joints. The arrows between the oscillators indicate phase couplings. 
˙
ϕ
t
i
= 2 π f + ζ
t
i
(9a) 
ζ
t
i
=
∑
j
u
t   1
j
c
ij
sin
(
˙
ϕ
t   1
j
 
˙
ϕ
t   1
i
  ψ
ij
)
(9b) 
¨u
t
i
= c
1
[
c
1
4
 
U
i
  u
t   1
i
)
  ˙u
t   1
i
]
(9c) 
¨
d
t
i
= c
2
[
c
2
4
 
D
i
  d
t   1
i
)
 
˙
d
t   1
i
]
(9d) 
α
t
i
= u
t
i
sin
 
ϕ
t
i
)
+ d
t
i
(9e) 
For each oscillator i in the network, u
i 
represents the amplitude while d
i 
and ϕ
i 
denote deviation and phase respectively. α
i 
is the actual output of 
the oscillator i . c
ij 
and ψ
ij 
specify couplings among the oscillators. The 
frequency f is kept constant during training and can be varied as 
required during testing. Constants are mentioned in Table II .
3.3. Control schematics and algorithm
In the schematics ( Fig. 3 ), DRL part is implemented as a multilayer 
perceptron (MLP) with 2 layers (64 neurons per hidden layer). The pa -
rameters of this network are updated during training using TRPO (3) 
according to Algorithm I. This network outputs parameters of CPG 
network namely the phase couplings – ψ
ij
. The oscillator network is 
implemented as a system of equations represented by the system in (9). 
The system (9a to 9e) is implemented as a python class whose input is 
the desired frequency, amplitude and phase difference between the 
rhythmic patterns. And the system outputs an array containing time 
evolution of the rhythmic patterns. In TRPO, multiple batches are 
collected before the policy is updated. During the batch collection step 
(lines 3 to 10 of Algorithm I), first the MLP is inferred using the latest 
available states. In our case, the action space of DRL is not the final 
action space since the policy output is not directly rendered on the robot. 
The architecture resembles ( Hameed et al., 2022 ) in which the policy 
output (action space) is not directly rendered on the robot. The action 
space corresponds to the weights and goals of so-called dynamic motion 
primitives which are integrated to calculate final inputs for the robot 
joints.
In this case, the action space is set point for the CPG-net. With the 
latest available set point, oscillators are integrated to acquire actions for 
the robot joints. These actions are rendered on the robot in simulation 
which in turn returns the updated joint positions of the robot. The 
updated joint configurations are then saved in a queue along with a 
history of the last tail-beat cycle. This cycle is then analyzed to estimate 
phase difference between the joints. The updated information is then 
concatenated with the desired force and fed back to the MLP, and the 
loop goes on for the length of episode. Once the required number of 
batches are collected, the policy is updated according to update rules 
from lines 11 to 15 of Algorithm I.
3.4. Training methodology
A large amount of data is required to train models in DRL. The robot 
hardware cannot be used to collect that much data. Hence, a physics 
emulator ( Todorov et al., 2012 ) is used to simulate the agent and to 
perform training. In the emulator a physical model of the robot is 
developed. The head is modelled as an ellipsoid, links as rectangular 
bars and joints as cylinders. The model can be seen in the supplementary 
video. Actuators are defined at joint locations. The emulator returns the 
updated state of the robot when the input α
i 
generated by Algorithm I is 
given to the actuators. This data is collected and is used to train the 
networks.
Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2025.120322
During training the translational degrees of freedom (i.e., along x 
and y axes) are locked and therefore, the robot stays in its place. A force 
sensor is installed in the global frame of reference. The forces developed 
by the agent are recorded by the force sensor. This force has two com -
ponents. The component along the longitudinal axis – F
x 
is the thrust or 
propulsive component since it is primarily responsible to propel the 
robot. F
y 
is the lateral component perpendicular to the thrust component 
( Fig. 4 -right).
In the reward function, the difference between the actual and the 
desired force is minimized, 
r =   ‖ F
d
  F
a
‖
2
(10a) 
where F
a
=
∑
m
i = n
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ̅
F
x
i
2
+ F
y
i
2
√
(10b) 
Here F
d 
represents desired set point for the force whereas F
a 
is the 
actual force recorded by the sensor averaged over ( m   n ) timesteps. 
When the tail undulates, the joints move according to travelling wave 
profile and return to the original configuration after one tail-beat cycle. 
The duration of the cycle depends on tail-beat frequency. To generate a 
higher thrust force ( F
x
) at fixed frequency, swimming pattern must 
change. This change will also alter F
y 
since both components are coupled 
and one cannot change completely independent of the other. Using one 
Table 1 
Cost of transport and turning.
Frequency (Hz) f = 0.7 f = 1.0 f = 1.3 f = 1.6
Motion Pattern Cost of Transport-CoT ( × 10 
2 
J/m)
Anguilliform 1.29 1.16 1.17 1.23
Sub-Carangiform 0.88 0.73 0.71 0.67
Carangiform 1.15 0.85 0.82 0.77
Motion Pattern Cost of Turning-CoTu ( × 10 
2 
J/rad)
Anguilliform 0.61 0.58 0.53 0.96
Sub-Carangiform 0.32 0.30 0.28 0.32
Carangiform 0.51 0.47 0.44 0.46
Table 2 
Values of constants.
γ 0.99 f 1.0 Hz
a
δ 0.001 U
i
0.3 rad
a
c
2
c
1
/ 4 ​ ​
a
Held constant during training. Can be changed as required during testing.
Fig. 4. Left : Thrust measurement setup. Right : Periodic force patterns devel -
oped by the robot while swimming with the anguilliform pattern at 1.0 Hz for 4 
s. Blue (solid) line represents F
x 
(average ~0.4 N) and green (dashed) line 
represents F
y 
which oscillates around zero. (For interpretation of the references 
to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of 
this article.)
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
5 


===== PAGE 6 =====
component provides little room for exploration but using both compo -
nents provides large room for exploration in the parameter space and 
therefore helps the development of different patterns.
It should be noted here that the average thrust can be controlled 
directly by controlling the frequency of oscillations. This method is 
commonly used in literature ( Zhu et al., 2019/09 ) to control the thrust 
and the speed of such robots. The goal here is to develop different mo -
tion patterns. To avoid learning frequency to thrust relationship, the 
frequency of oscillations is kept constant throughout the training pro -
cess. In this way the control architecture has to explore other means – 
different swimming gaits to deliver different target presets for the force. 
This is the key idea that enables the robot to learn and adopt multiple 
motion patterns.
To develop varied patterns, F
y 
is used in addition to F
x
. It can be 
observed from Fig. 4 -right that for each tail-beat cycle, the average of F
y 
remains zero for straight line motion contrary to F
x
, average of which 
has to be non-zero for forward motion. At low frequencies, the effect of 
F
y 
is visible in the form sway of body about the longitudinal axis. But at 
high frequencies, this effect is not very visible. In real fishes, this effect is 
also mitigated by the flat shape of the fishes posing high drag resistance 
perpendicular to the longitudinal axis. Therefore, F
y 
is also critical in 
determining the swimming gait, and hence, it is included in the reward 
function.
4. Experimental setup
4.1. Robot hardware
The robot design ( Fig. 2 ) is inspired by BCF swimmers. The head 
contains a Raspberry Pi (RPi 4B) microcontroller, and a battery. An 
external laptop communicates with RPi to send and receive high-level 
commands. The body part is composed of four 1-DoF joints. The dis -
tance between two consecutive joints is 6.5 cm. These segments (and the 
head) are made with machined plastic and have position servos inside to 
actuate them. At the end of the tail, there is a caudal fin. The caudal fin is 
carved out of a 0.7 mm carbon fibre sheet.
4.2. Experimental setup
A small laboratory swimming pool (2.5 m × 4 m) (water level ~ 1 ft) 
is used to perform experiments. The buoyancy of the robot is set to keep 
the robot ’ s body (tail and fin) just under the surface of water. On the 
corners of the pool, four tracking cameras are installed at 3 m height. 
The setup can track the robot while it swims in the pool by tracking the 
infrared reflective markers installed on the head of the robot.
For thrust measurement, a static structure is assembled inside the 
pool ( Fig. 4 -left). A rod is attached to the robot ’ s head. Two bearings are 
used to let the rod rotate around x and y axes passing through the center 
of rod. The bearings are affixed to the static structure, due to which the 
rod and the robot itself cannot translate in any direction. The other end 
of the rod meets a load cell which measures the forces developed by the 
robot. Data from load cells is first amplified and then recorded using a 
data recorder. A camera is installed on the top to capture waveforms 
induced in the robot ’ s body.
5. Pattern training results
To visualize the motion patterns, we remove the restriction previ -
ously imposed during training and let the agent swim. We will first 
observe static postures of the agent ( Figs. 5a and 6 a) and then the tra -
jectories traced by the fin of the agent while it swims as shown by the 
periodic patterns in Figs. 5b and 6 b. It provides a good way to visualize 
and compare swimming gaits. Finally, we record videos for both simu -
lation and hardware results which can be viewed in the supplementary 
material.
5.1. Simulation results
The three results from the left to right in Fig. 5 are corresponding to 
the force targets ( F
d
) from 1.8 N, 3.0 N, to 4.2 N respectively. For the 
lowest target (1.8 N), the motion pattern in Fig. 5 a (left) looks similar to 
the anguilliform pattern shown in Fig. 1 . The wavenumber is the largest 
as almost half of the propulsive wave is contained in the agent ’ s body. As 
the set point for the desired force is increased by 1.2 N, the resemblance 
of tail configuration shifts to the sub-carangiform and eventually to the 
carangiform pattern on further increase of 1.2 N. These poses should be 
observed along with Fig. 1 . The agent now contains almost one quarter 
( Fig. 5 a-center) and even less than one quarter ( Fig. 5 a-right) of the 
travelling wave within its body.
Fig. 5 b shows fin trajectories for the three cases. The wavelength ( λ
1 
= 12.2 cm) is the shortest in the anguilliform pattern. The waveform 
starts to expand, and the wavelength increases to 24.5 cm in the sub- 
carangiform pattern and finally to 38 cm in the carangiform case. 
Therefore, as the desired force targets increase, the wavelengths in -
crease. The ratio of the wavelengths from the anguilliform to sub- 
carangiform pattern is 0.5 and from the sub-carangiform to carangi -
form pattern is 0.6. Later, these ratios will be compared with the hard -
ware results.
Fig. 5. (a) Snapshots of the robot in simulation when the framework renders 
the anguilliform (left), sub-carangiform (center), and carangiform (right) mo -
tion patterns after training. (b) Fin tracks traced by the fin of the robot in 
simulation while it swims with the patterns shown in (a).
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
6 


===== PAGE 7 =====
5.2. Testing results
Hardware results are summarized in Fig. 6 . The pose on the left (of 
Fig. 6 a) is the anguilliform pattern. It has similar body and fin config -
uration as the one in simulation ( Fig. 5 a-left) whereby the tail of the 
robot contains one half of the travelling wave. The pose in the center (of 
Fig. 6 a), corresponds to the sub-carangiform pattern and is similar to the 
body posture in Fig. 5 a-center. Lastly, the tail configuration on the right 
(of Fig. 6 a) looks similar to the carangiform pattern and resembles 
Fig. 5 a-right. The hardware poses in all three cases conform with the 
simulation results. One can observe the similarity of hardware poses 
( Fig. 6 a) and simulation poses ( Fig. 5 a) with the classical BCF modes 
introduced in Sec. I ( Fig. 1 ).
Next, fin trajectories are compared between the simulation ( Fig. 5 b) 
and hardware experiments ( Fig. 6 b). The one on the left is acquired 
when the robot swims with the anguilliform pattern whereby the 
wavelength is the shortest (13 cm) among all. It starts to expand when it 
swims with the sub-carangiform pattern (24 cm) and becomes the 
largest in the case of carangiform pattern (40 cm) thereby giving the 
ratios of λ
1 
and λ
2 
to be 0.54 and from λ
2 
to λ
3 
to be 0.6. These ratios 
match closely with the ones in simulation (Sec. VIA).
Force measurement results on the hardware are shared in Fig. 6 c. 
These results are not individual component of forces, but the combined 
force of both components calculated by F
c
=
 
F
x
2
+ F
y
2
)
1 / 2
, same as the 
definition of F
a 
in (10b). Combined force ( F
c
) is shown by solid and its 
average ( F
c
) by dashed lines. For the anguilliform case, the average is 
around 1.7 N. It rises to 2.9 N and 4.1 N for the sub-carangiform and 
carangiform cases. There exists a clear difference in the combined 
average forces in the three cases which makes it easier for the control 
framework to explore multiple gaits in the parameter space.
Force components for the anguilliform case are shown in Fig. 4 and 
for the sub-carangiform and carangiform cases in Fig. 7 . The nature of 
profiles is characteristic to each swimming gait. For the first two cases, 
the rise or fall in F
y 
is gradual whereas for the last case, it stays at 
maxima before falling rapidly to the next minima. The average value of 
F
x 
increases from the anguilliform to carangiform case and remains zero 
for F
y
.
It should be noted from Figs. 5b and 6 b that the fin trajectories 
expand from left to right. It can also expand if the tail-beat frequency is 
increased. If the frequency is increased, the body will wriggle faster, and 
the agent will swim faster resulting in an expanded fin track compared to 
the one generated at low speed when observed for a fixed distance of 
travel. But the expansion phenomena shown in Figs. 5b and 6 b is not due 
to any change in tail-beat frequency. The frequency is kept constant (at 
1.0 Hz) in all three cases. The presence of 9 cycles in the time duration of 
9 s ( Fig. 6 c) also confirms that the tail-beat frequency remains same in 
all the cases. Hence, the expansion and the increase in force is purely due 
to changes in swimming gaits. The tail-beat frequency is held constant 
by the oscillator network. Therefore, to cope up with increasing force 
targets, the DRL part must evolve the swimming gait to generate larger 
forces and in doing so, it develops different swimming gaits.
Fig. 6. (a) Snapshots of tail when the anguilliform ( left ), sub-carangiform 
( center ) and carangiform ( right ) patterns are rendered on the robot hardware 
while it is attached to the thrust measurement setup. (b) Fin trajectories traced 
by the fin of the robot while swimming with the patterns shown in (a). (c) 
Combined force output F
c 
(N) of the robot while swimming with the three 
patterns in (a).
Fig. 7. Periodic force patterns developed by the robot while swimming with 
the sub-carangiform ( left ) and carangiform ( right ) gaits at 1.0 Hz for 4 s. Blue 
(solid) line represents the thrust component – F
x 
whereas green (dashed) line 
represents the y-component – F
y 
which oscillates around zero. (For interpre -
tation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to 
the Web version of this article.)
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
7 


===== PAGE 8 =====
6. Comparison of swimming performance between different 
swimming gaits
In this part experiments are performed to compare the gaits with 
each other in terms of swimming speed and cost of transport. Frequency 
is a key parameter to control the speed of such biomimetic robots. Using 
DRL-only scheme, it is not straightforward to control the speed on bio -
mimetic platforms since it involves a network that has to be queried at 
every iteration. In the proposed framework, since the rhythmic pattern 
generation is handled separately, it is possible to control and vary the 
key parameters of rhythmic motion e.g., the period of oscillations can be 
varied by altering the respective parameter in the system (9) of 
oscillators.
6.1. Straight-line swimming
The speed of the robot at different frequencies while swimming with 
the three patterns is compared in Fig. 8 (left). Overall, we observe the 
anguilliform pattern to be the worst performing with speeds ranging 
from 12 cm/s to 17 cm/s. The sub-carangiform gait follows, giving a 
minimum of 22.5 cm/s at 0.7 Hz and a maximum of 36 cm/s at 1.6 Hz. 
The carangiform pattern performs the best with outputs ranging from 
30 cm/s to 45 cm/s.
Cost of transport (CoT) ( Zhu et al., 2019/09 ) is a parameter that can 
be helpful to compare the patterns, 
CoT = P
in
/ v (11) 
where P
in 
is the power consumption of the robot while swimming with 
linear speed v . Table I shares CoT values for all the cases. CoT decreases 
with increasing tail-beat frequency. The anguilliform mode is the most 
expensive owing to its poor linear speed performance whereas the sub- 
carangiform pattern is the most economical among all giving the lowest 
value of 0.67 J/m at 1.6 Hz.
6.2. Turning
To quantify turning performance, non-zero constant deviation ( D
i 
=
[0.0, 0.3, 0.3, 0.3] rad) (9d) is input to CPG network so that the robot 
can perform turning motion. Fig. 8 (right) summarizes the turning 
performance in terms of turning rates observed at 4 different frequencies 
while the agent employs the three gaits.
Unlike straight-line swimming speed results, sub-carangiform gait 
performs the best in the turning case with a maximum turning rate of 
57
◦
/s at 1.3 Hz. The anguilliform pattern yields very low turning rates 
(maximum of 25
◦
/s only). The carangiform pattern lies in the middle of 
two with steering rates ranging from 40
◦
/s to 45
◦
/s.
Unlike the linear motion case, turning at high frequency does not 
necessarily mean that it would be faster. In straight-line swimming, 
when the tail undulates, it generates propulsion for the entire tail-beat 
cycle. However, during turning, this continuity breaks. During 
turning, there is a pushing phase in which the robot uses its fin to push 
water to turn itself. Then, there is a retraction phase in which the tail 
retracts back. This creates an effect opposite to the desired turning di -
rection. Lower frequency allows the robot enough time to make com -
plete use of the pushing phase. At high frequency the retraction phase 
breaks the angular momentum. This is the reason behind the fall of 
angular turning rates after 1.3 Hz ( Fig. 8 -right). This effect is also 
observed and discussed in ( Zhong et al., 2017 ).
We do not find any yardstick to rate turning performance on such 
platforms. Therefore, in the style of cost of transport ( CoT ), we calculate 
cost of turning ( CoTu ). 
CoTu = P
in
/ ω (12) 
where ω is the angular velocity of the robot. The results are shared in 
Table 1 . The cost is minimum for the case of sub-carangiform mode and 
the anguilliform is the most expensive mode for turning as well.
6.3. Backward mode and free-swimming snapshots
Backward Mode. A distinguishing feature of some anguilliform 
swimmers is their ability to swim backward. This feature can be devel -
oped by setting a negative target for the desired force. In this case, a 
forward travelling wave (originating from the fin and terminating at the 
head) is generated thereby generating negative average thrust. The 
corresponding result can be observed in Fig. 9 . A free-swimming 
experiment is also conducted for the backward mode which reports 
average speed of 8 cm/s ( Fig. 9 -right).
Free-Swimming Experiment. Snapshots from the free-swimming ex -
periments are shown in Fig. 10 . Fig. 10 a, 10b and 10c represent the 
anguilliform, sub-carangiform, and carangiform cases respectively. Tail- 
Fig. 8. Linear and angular speed comparison of the robot while swimming with 
different motion patterns at four different tail-beat frequencies. Blue, brown, 
and green markers represent the robot ’ s linear ( left graph ) and angular ( right 
graph ) speeds while swimming with the anguilliform, sub-carangiform and 
carangiform modes respectively. (For interpretation of the references to colour 
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 9. Left : Thrust F
x 
(solid blue) and lateral F
y 
(dashed green) forces devel -
oped by the robot undulating in backward mode while attached to the thrust 
measurement setup. Right : Velocities V
x 
(solid blue) and V
y 
(dashed green) 
while the robot is swimming freely in backward mode. (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.)
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
8 


===== PAGE 9 =====
beat frequency in all three cases is the same (1.0 Hz) but due to different 
gaits, the linear speeds vary and the robot takes different time intervals 
to swim for the same distance.
The fourth sub-figure ( Fig. 10 d) is for the backward swimming case 
in which the robot starts from the right side, and swims in backward 
mode to the left side. In this mode, the fin is in the front of the robot. The 
motion pattern looks like the anguilliform pattern. The hardware that 
has been used so far has a big and heavy head and it is difficult for the 
robot to swim with a bulky posterior end. So, a smaller head ( Fig. 2 - 
right) is used in this case. The slow speed in this case is because there is 
no fin at the point where the travelling wave terminates.
7. Conclusions and discussions
A control schematic is proposed to train the robot in simulation to 
learn different swimming modes. These modes are then rendered on the 
physical robot and compared in terms of their performance. It is 
revealed that all of the developed swimming gaits have certain benefits 
as follows. 
1) The carangiform mode produces the fastest linear speed, but the 
power consumption in this mode is also very high, which inhibits it 
to be the most economical mode. The sub-carangiform swimming 
gait for its low wattage consumption stands out in terms of economy. 
Although it is not the leading mode in terms of speed, it follows the 
leading mode closely.
2) Similarly, the predominance of undulatory feature in the sub- 
carangiform mode makes it an ideal candidate for turning as well. 
The carangiform pattern, which lies a step further towards the 
oscillatory end of the spectrum, makes it an ideal candidate for 
straight-line swimming but not for turning. This means that the 
turning phenomena is better achieved with a mixture of undulatory 
and oscillatory modes rather than pure modes.
3) The anguilliform mode performs worse among all the three modes in 
both linear and angular cases. But the backward swimming in this 
mode gives the robot a unique ability. Hence, all three modes have 
benefits of their own.
The classical kinematic classification of BCF swimmers with four 
major modes should be better considered as a continuum ( Di Santo et al., 
2021 ). This motivates the development of a flexible and generic control 
architecture for robots mimicking BCF anatomy to tap the benefits of not 
one but a range of organisms. An effort is made in this regard by 
combining DRL with CPG to develop multiple swimming patterns 
similar to ones observed among natural BCF swimmers for a single robot 
that mimics BCF anatomy.
In this work, it is not intended to generate a gait that surpasses results 
shared in other works in speed or any other aspect. Some swimming 
gaits are naturally slow, and some are naturally fast. In literature, for 
such robots, efforts are usually concentrated to performing navigation 
using a singular gait and not much attention is paid towards emergence 
and reproduction of multiple gaits. In this article, the focus is kept at 
producing a family of gaits and their comparison. Further comparisons 
fall beyond the scope of this investigation which pertains mostly to the 
fundamental point that is how we can obtain various patterns. The re -
sults in ( Li et al., 2011 ) render three motion patterns on the same robotic 
fish but demonstrate slight difference in performance with averaged 
linear speeds of 17, 21, and 22 cm/s for the three cases. However, the 
results in this study report obvious difference and better performance 
quantitatively.
Rhythmogenic circuits have been studied in animals for a long time 
( Ijspeert, 2008/05 ; MacKay-Lyons, 2002 ). Central control system plays a 
role in modulating these circuits to acquire desired behavior ( Ijspeert 
et al., 2007/03 ). It raises a question whether one central control system 
can generate patterns exhibited by different swimmers. To explore this 
aspect, a similar bioinspired scheme is realized whereby a central system 
commands pattern generators in the peripheral system to acquire 
diverse behavior. It turns out that the central network can learn to 
optimize and modulate the pattern generator to extract multi-modal 
behavior. Hence, the study realizes natural gait generation mechanism 
and provides a step to further study the biomechanics of gait generation 
in BCF type swimmers.
In this study, testing is done in a laboratory pool to visualize the gaits 
and to highlight basic differences between them such as the speed and 
cost of travel. Real world testing can better demonstrate the perfor -
mance of different modes. For example, the impact of disturbance from 
waves and water currents on performance of different modes is an 
interesting direction to explore. It requires solving a few challenges such 
as communication. Wired communication is used in this study which is 
not very feasible in real scenarios. Similarly, external tracking setup is 
used to collect position and velocity information. Position tracking in 
marine environment is challenging. These are some limitations of this 
study that can be worked upon in a later study.
Future work will include tackling the above challenges. Also, we can 
add a navigation layer to this framework to compare navigation per -
formance of different gaits.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Imran Hameed: Writing – original draft, Methodology, 
Fig. 10. Stills from free-swimming experiments for the anguilliform (a), sub-carangiform (b), carangiform (c), and backward (d) motion modes. Time stamps are 
mentioned at the bottom of snapshots. (a), (b), and (c) are from left to right whereas (d) is from right to left.
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
9 


===== PAGE 10 =====
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Xu 
Chao: Validation, Investigation, Data curation. David Navarro-Alar -
con: Validation, Supervision, Data curation. Xingjian Jing: Writing – 
review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project adminis -
tration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The work is supported by a startup fund of City University of Hong 
Kong (9380140), Shenzhen-HK-Macau Scheme-C (9240115) and an 
Innovation and Technology Fund project of HK ITC (9443005); and all 
testing and prototypes were conducted in the Laboratory of Nonlinear 
Dynamics, Vibration, & Control, CityU (Xingjian JING is the corre -
sponding author).
References
Barrett, D., Grosenbaugh, M., Triantafyllou, M., 1996. The optimal control of a flexible 
hull robotic undersea vehicle propelled by an oscillating foil. In: Proceedings of 
Symposium on Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Technology, pp. 1 – 9 .
Breder, C.M., 1926. The locomotion of fishes. Zoologica : scientific contributions of the 
New York Zoological Society 4 (5), 159 – 297 .
Campanaro, L., Gangapurwala, S., De Martini, D., Merkt, W., Havoutis, I., 2021. CPG- 
actor: reinforcement learning for central pattern generators. In: Towards 
Autonomous Robotic Systems. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 25 – 35 .
Cho, Y., Manzoor, S., Choi, Y., 2019. Adaptation to environmental change using 
reinforcement learning for robotic salamander. Intell. Serv. Robot. 12 (3), 209 – 218 .
Clapham, R.J., Hu, H., 2014. iSplash-II: realizing fast carangiform swimming to 
outperform a real fish. In: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference On Intelligent 
Robots And Systems , 14-18 Sept, pp. 1080 – 1086 .
Crespi, A., Ijspeert, A.J., 2008. Online optimization of swimming and crawling in an 
amphibious snake robot. IEEE Trans. Robot. 24 (1), 75 – 87 .
D ’ AoUT and Aerts, 1999. A kinematic comparison of forward and backward swimming in 
the eel Anguilla anguilla. J. Exp. Biol. 202 (Pt 11), 1511 – 1521 .
Daou, H.E., Salum ¨ae, T., Ristolainen, A., Toming, G., Listak, M., Kruusmaa, M., 2011. 
A bio-mimetic design and control of a fish-like robot using compliant structures. In: 
2011 15th International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR), pp. 563 – 568 .
Di Santo, V., et al., 2021. Convergence of undulatory swimming kinematics across a 
diversity of fishes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118 (49), e2113206118, 2021/12/07 . 
EunJung, K., Youngil, Y., 2004. Design and dynamic analysis of fish robot: PoTuna. In: 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings. 
ICRA ’ 04, vol. 5, pp. 4887 – 4892, 26 April-1 May 2004 2004, vol. 5 . 
Farideddin Masoomi, S., Gutschmidt, S., Chen, X., Sellier, M., 2015. The kinematics and 
dynamics of undulatory motion of a tuna-mimetic robot. Int. J. Adv. Rob. Syst. 12 
(7), 83 .
Fras, J., Noh, Y., Macias, M., Wurdemann, H., Althoefer, K., 2018. Bio-inspired Octopus 
robot based on novel soft fluidic actuator. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1583 – 1588 .
Fujiwara, S., Yamaguchi, S., 2017. Development of fishlike robot that imitates 
carangiform and subcarangiform swimming motions. J. Aero Aqua Bio-mech. 6, 1 – 8 .
Gao, H., Xiao, X., Qiu, L., Meng, M.Q.H., King, N.K.K., Ren, H., 2021. Remote-Center-of- 
Motion recommendation toward brain needle intervention using deep reinforcement 
learning. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
(ICRA), pp. 8295 – 8301 .
Gao, T., Lin, Y., Qiu, L., Ho Tse, Z.T., Ren, H., 2021. Effects of cross-flow fan on 
hydrodynamic and acoustic performance of underwater fan-wing thruster. Ocean. 
Eng. 241, 110078 .
Gravish, N., Lauder, G.V., 2018. Robotics-inspired biology. J. Exp. Biol. 221 (7), 
jeb138438 .
Hameed, I., Chao, X., Navarro-Alarcon, D., Jing, X., 2022. Training dynamic motion 
primitives using deep reinforcement learning to control a robotic tadpole. In: 2022 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 
pp. 6881 – 6887, 23-27 Oct. 2022 . 
Hultmark, M., Leftwich, M., Smits, A., 2007. Flowfield measurements in the wake of a 
robotic lamprey. Exp. Fluid 43, 683 – 690 .
Ijspeert, A.J., 2008. Central pattern generators for locomotion control in animals and 
robots: a review. Neural Network. 21 (4), 642 – 653 .
Ijspeert, A.J., Crespi, A., Ryczko, D., Cabelguen, J.-M., 2007. From swimming to walking 
with a salamander robot driven by a spinal cord model. Science 315 (5817), 
1416 – 1420 .
Junzhi, Y., Min, T., Shuo, W., Erkui, C., 2004. Development of a biomimetic robotic fish 
and its control algorithm. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern., Part B (Cybernetics) 34 (4), 
1798 – 1810 .
Katzschmann, R.K., DelPreto, J., MacCurdy, R., Rus, D., 2018. Exploration of underwater 
life with an acoustically controlled soft robotic fish. Sci. Robot. 3 (16), eaar3449 .
Kopman, V., Porfiri, M., 2013. Design, modeling, and characterization of a miniature 
robotic fish for research and education in biomimetics and bioinspiration. IEEE 
ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18 (2), 471 – 483 .
Li, W., Tianmiao, W., Guanhao, W., Jinlan, L., 2011. A novel method based on a force- 
feedback technique for the hydrodynamic investigation of kinematic effects on 
robotic fish. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 
pp. 203 – 208 .
Li, G., et al., 2021. Self-powered soft robot in the mariana trench. Nature 591 (7848), 
66 – 71 .
Lighthill, M.J., 1960. Note on the swimming of slender fish. J. Fluid Mech. 9 (2), 
305 – 317 .
Lindsey, C.C., 1978. Form, function, and locomotory habits in fish. Fish Physiol. 7, 
1 – 100 .
Liu, X., Onal, C.D., Fu, J., 2023. Reinforcement learning of CPG-regulated locomotion 
controller for a soft snake robot. IEEE Trans. Robot. 39 (5), 3382 – 3401 .
Low, K.H., Chong, C.W., Zhou, C., 2010. Performance study of a fish robot propelled by a 
flexible caudal fin. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation, pp. 90 – 95 .
MacKay-Lyons, M., 2002. Central pattern generation of locomotion: a review of the 
evidence. Phys. Ther. 82 (1), 69 – 83 .
Marchesini, E., Corsi, D., Farinelli, A., 2021. Benchmarking safe deep reinforcement 
learning in aquatic navigation. In: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5590 – 5595, 27 Sept.-1 Oct. 2021 . 
McIsaac, K.A., Ostrowski, J.P., 2003. A framework for steering dynamic robotic 
locomotion systems. Int. J. Robot Res. 22 (2), 83 – 97 .
Meng, Y., Wu, Z., Dong, H., Wang, J., Yu, J., 2022. Toward a novel robotic manta with 
unique pectoral fins. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern.: Systems 52 (3), 1663 – 1673 .
Milad Shafiee, G.B.a.A.I., 2024. ManyQuadrupeds: learning a single locomotion policy 
for diverse quadruped robots. In: IEEE International Conference On Robotics and 
Automation ICRA 2024 , Yokohama, Japan .
Mnih, V., et al., 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 
518 (7540), 529 – 533 .
Morgansen, K.A., Vela, P.A., Burdick, J.W., 2002. Trajectory stabilization for a planar 
carangiform robot fish. In: Proceedings 2002 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (Cat. No.02CH37292), vol. 1, pp. 756 – 762 vol. 1 . 
Niu, X., Xu, J., Ren, Q., Wang, Q., 2013. Locomotion generation and motion library 
design for an anguilliform robotic fish. Journal of Bionic Engineering 10 (3), 
251 – 264 .
Niu, X., Xu, J., Ren, Q., Wang, Q., 2014. Locomotion learning for an anguilliform robotic 
fish using central pattern generator approach. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 61 (9), 
4780 – 4787 .
Ostrowski, J., Burdick, J., 1998. The geometric mechanics of undulatory robotic 
locomotion. Int. J. Robot Res. 17 (7), 683 – 701 .
Raj, A., Thakur, A., 2016. Fish-inspired robots: design, sensing, actuation, and 
autonomy — a review of research. Bioinspiration Biomimetics 11 (3), 031001 .
Saimek, S., Li, P.Y., 2004. Motion planning and control of a swimming machine. Int. J. 
Robot Res. 23 (1), 27 – 53 .
Salum ¨ae, T., Kruusmaa, M., 2013. Flow-relative control of an underwater robot. Proc. R. 
Soc. A 469 (2153), 20120671 .
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Moritz, P., Jordan, M.I., Abbeel, P., 2015. Trust region policy 
optimization. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1889 – 1897 .
Sfakiotakis, M., Lane, D.M., Davies, J.B.C., 1999. Review of fish swimming modes for 
aquatic locomotion. IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 24 (2), 237 – 252 .
Singh, H., Maksym, T., Wilkinson, J., Williams, G., 2017. Inexpensive, small AUVs for 
studying ice-covered polar environments. Sci. Robot. 2 (7), eaan4809 .
Todorov, E., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., 2012. MuJoCo: a physics engine for model-based control. 
In: 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 
pp. 5026 – 5033 .
Triantafyllou, M., Triantafyllou, G., 1995. An efficient swimming machine. Sci. Ame. - 
SCI AMER 272, 64 – 70 .
Wang, W., Gu, D., Xie, G., 2019. Autonomous optimization of swimming gait in a fish 
robot with multiple onboard sensors. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern.: Systems 49 (5), 
891 – 903 .
Wang, R., Wang, S., Wang, Y., Cheng, L., Tan, M., 2022. Development and motion control 
of biomimetic underwater robots: a survey. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern.: Systems 
52 (2), 833 – 844 .
Wu, Z., Yu, J., Tan, M., Zhang, J., 2014. Kinematic comparison of forward and backward 
swimming and maneuvering in a self-propelled sub-carangiform robotic fish. Journal 
of Bionic Engineering 11 (2), 199 – 212 .
Yan, Q., Han, Z., Zhang, S.-w., Yang, J., 2008. Parametric research of experiments on a 
carangiform robotic fish. Journal of Bionic Engineering 5 (2), 95 – 101 .
Yan, S., Wu, Z., Wang, J., Tan, M., Yu, J., 2021. Efficient cooperative structured control 
for a multijoint biomimetic robotic fish. IEEE ASME Trans. Mechatron. 26 (5), 
2506 – 2516 .
Yao, Q., et al., 2023. Learning-based propulsion control for amphibious quadruped 
robots with dynamic adaptation to changing environment. IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 8 
(12), 7889 – 7896 .
Yu, J., Wu, Z., Wang, M., Tan, M., 2016. CPG network optimization for a biomimetic 
robotic fish via PSO. IEEE Transact. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. 27 (9), 1962 – 1968 .
Yu, J., Wu, Z., Yang, X., Yang, Y., Zhang, P., 2021. Underwater target tracking control of 
an untethered robotic fish with a camera stabilizer. IEEE Trans. Sys. Man Cybern.: 
Systems 51 (10), 6523 – 6534 .
Zhang, T., et al., 2022. From simulation to reality: a learning framework for fish-like 
robots to perform control tasks. IEEE Trans. Robot. 1 – 18 .
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
10 


===== PAGE 11 =====
Zheng, J., Zhang, T., Wang, C., Xiong, M., Xie, G., 2022. Learning for attitude holding of 
a robotic fish: an end-to-end approach with sim-to-real transfer. IEEE Trans. Robot. 
38 (2), 1287–1303 .
Zhong, Y., Li, Z., Du, R., 2017. A novel robot fish with wire-driven active body and 
compliant tail. IEEE ASME Trans. Mechatron. 22 (4), 1633–1643 .
Zhu, J., White, C., Wainwright, D.K., Di Santo, V., Lauder, G.V., Bart-Smith, H., 2019. 
Tuna robotics: a high-frequency experimental platform exploring the performance 
space of swimming fishes. Sci. Robot. 4 (34), eaax4615 .
I. Hameed et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ocean Engineering 320 (2025) 120322 
11 